JUDY WOODRUFF: It was a big day
in the fight over health care
reform in the United States
and the Senate's push
to replace Obamacare.
John Yang digs in
to the details.
JOHN YANG: Late today,
the Congressional Budget
Office issued its analysis
of the Senate health
care bill.
It found that, by 2026,
22 million more Americans
would be uninsured
than under current law.
It would also reduce the
federal deficit by $321
billion over that period.
Now, that estimate of uninsured
Americans is slightly lower
than the CBO projection
for the House version,
which passed in May.
But a rising tide of opposition
is adding to the difficult
dynamics of trying to pass
the Senate bill this week.
Joining me now to break all
this down, Julie Rovner.
She's the chief Washington
correspondent for
Kaiser Health Care News.
And our own Lisa Desjardins.
Lisa, Julie, thanks
for joining us.
Julie, let me start with you.
Drill down a little bit for us
in that number of uninsured.
And also what did it say
about the effect on premiums?
JULIE ROVNER, Kaiser Health
News: Well, basically, what the
CBO said is that even though the
Senate bill is different in
many, many ways from the House
bill, they end up in roughly
the same place in terms
of number of people
who would be uninsured.
Basically, both of the bills
would double the percentage
of people without insurance
compared to the
Affordable Care Act.
One of the sort of remarkable
things that it found is that
it would do it for different
reasons and in different ways.
For example, the Senate bill
would peg its help with people
paying premiums to a less
valuable plan, a plan
that would pay fewer of
people's medical expenses.
And what they found is that
for a lot of low-income
people, even if they get
help paying the premium,
they wouldn't buy insurance
because they wouldn't have any
help using their insurance.
The deductibles and
the other cost-sharing
would just be too high.
JOHN YANG: Lisa, you
were just on a conference
call with the CBO.
What did you learn?
LISA DESJARDINS: I think that
is the standout point here.
We know who these
uninsured people would be.
The 22 million that you just
spoke about, John, those are
mostly low-income Americans
and some on the edge
of middle class.
We're talking about $30,000
in income for an individual.
So, that's not poverty.
That's twice the
level of poverty.
The CBO found here that some
of those groups, people making
under $30,000 a year, would
go from about 10 do 15 percent
uninsured, maybe 20 percent,
to maybe 40 percent of the
people making $30,000 or
less would be uninsured
under this plan.
So, that's a big hit
to that one group.
JOHN YANG: And, Lisa, of
course, you're usually up
on Capitol Hill for us.
What does this report do to
the calculus of trying to get
50 votes by the end of this
week to pass this
bill in the Senate?
LISA DESJARDINS: Today
started, and it was
already very tough math.
In fact, many of my sources all
day were saying they were not
sure how Senate Leader McConnell
could do it.
This makes it even
more difficult.
We have had reaction
in just the last hour.
Rand Paul has now said that
he's going to vote not just
against the bill, but to even
the idea of bringing it up.
That's a procedural vote that
we expect maybe Wednesday
called motion to proceed.
If they can't get 51 votes
for even starting this debate
on that bill, it's a very bad
sign.
We're seeing "makes me
concerned" comments from
Senator Cassidy of Louisiana.
John McCain said this is
obviously not good news.
Across the board,
this is definitely not
helping Republicans.
It's not clear how this
gets across the finish line.
JOHN YANG: And, of course, the
51st vote would likely be the
vice president, who would break
a tie.
Julie, it wasn't just the CBO
that came out today, but there
were -- so there was other
bad news for this
Senate bill today.
JULIE ROVNER: Well,
there was also a plethora
of interest groups.
Most of the health care industry
has actually come out and
said they really don't -- they
don't like the way this -- the
direction this bill was going.
Some of them
vehemently oppose it.
Some, including like the
National Governors Association
-- this is the bipartisan group
which is barely agrees
on anything -- at least
came out and said we
don't think it should
be done this fast.
The National Association
of Medicaid Directors,
the people who would
be involved in actually
implementing the change to this
bill, came out with a very,
very strong statement saying
that no amount of flexibility
can make up for the dollar
amount of cuts to the Medicaid
program in this bill.
According to the CBO, it's
26 percent over 10 years.
JOHN YANG: And, Julie,
the Senate made a change
to this bill today.
What did they do and
why did they do it?
JULIE ROVNER: That's right.
The Senate -- the original
Senate draft that we
saw last week required
insurers to continue
to sell to people who have
preexisting health conditions,
but there was nothing in it to
encourage or urge healthy people
to actually buy insurance.
So they put in today or at
least what the CBO scored what
they call a six-month lockout.
So, if you had any kind of break
in coverage of more than 60
days in the previous 12 months,
you would have to wait six
months before you could get
coverage under this new bill.
JOHN YANG: So, Lisa, you say
we need 50 votes in the Senate.
They have got five already
saying they're against it.
You have got a lot on the fence.
Who should we be watching?
Who will tell us in the
next 48 hours whether or
not this is going to pass?
LISA DESJARDINS: Right
now, almost every
Republican senator is key.
But the one I'm watching the
most closely is Senator Shelley
Capito of West Virginia.
Think about her state.
Mr. Trump, President Trump,
won that state by 42 points.
If he cannot get a bill across
the finish line in a state
with that much support, there's
a real problem.
She has serious health
problems in that state, among
them, the opioid epidemic.
She wants more money
in this bill for that.
We will see if she gets it.
But that might not be enough.
She has a huge
Medicaid population.
She's not the only one, John.
I really ran a lot of
the statistics here.
Think about this.
Almost half of the Republicans
in the Senate have states
where 20 percent of their whole
population is on Medicaid.
That's something they're taking
very seriously with this bill.
JOHN YANG: Julie, are we likely
to see more changes in this
bill as they try to get to
that 50-vote mark?
JULIE ROVNER: Oh, absolutely.
One thing that the CBO -- I
guess one piece of good news
for the Republican in the Senate
is that the Senate bill
would save considerably more
money than the House bill.
So, in theory, they
have money to play with.
We would expect more money
to be devoting towards
helping the opioid epidemic.
They could make more changes.
The problem, the difficulty
is that any change
that moves towards the
more moderate numbers
will harden the opposition,
the more conservative,
and any change that
make the conservatives
happy will harden the
opposition of the moderates.
So, question, they only
have two votes to spare.
Finding 50 votes,
not an easy thing.
JOHN YANG: Well, it will be a
drama all week as we get toward
Friday and the self-imposed
deadline.
Julie Rovner, Lisa Desjardins,
thank you very much.
JULIE ROVNER: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
thank you, John.